=head1 NAME

gvpe.osdep - os dependent information

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This file tries to capture OS-dependent configuration or build issues,
quirks and platform limitations, as known.

=head1 TUN vs. TAP interface

Most operating systems nowadays support something called a
I<tunnel>-device, which makes it possible to divert IPv4 (and often other
protocols, too) into a userspace daemon like C<gvpe>. This is being
referred to as a TUN-device.

This is fine for point-to-point tunnels, but for a virtual ethernet, an
additional ethernet header is needed. This functionality (called a TAP
device here) is only provided by a subset of the configurations.

On platforms only supporting a TUN-device, gvpe will invoke it's magical
ethernet emulation package, which currently only handles ARP requests for
the IPv4 protocol (but more could be added, bu the tincd network drivers
might need to be modified for this to work). This means that on those
platforms, only IPv4 will be supported.

Also, since there is no way (currently) to tell gvpe which IP subnets are
found on a specific host, you will either need to hardwire the MAC address
for TUN-style hosts on all networks (and avoid ARP altogether, which is
possible), or you need to send a packet from these hosts into the vpn
network to tell gvpe the local interface address.

=head1 Interface Initialisation

Unless otherwise notes, the network interface will be initialized with the
expected MAC address and correct MTU value. With most interface drivers,
this is done by running C</sbin/ifconfig>, so make sure that this command
exists.

=head1 Interface Types

=head2 native/linux

TAP-device; already part of the kernel (only 2.4+ supported, but see
tincd/linux). This is the configuration tested best, as gvpe is being
developed on this platform.

C<ifname> should be set to the name of the network device.

To hardwire ARP addresses, use iproute2 (C<arp> can do it, too):

  MAC=fe:fd:80:00:00:$(printf "%02x" $NODEID)
  ip neighbour add 10.11.12.13 lladdr $MAC nud permanent dev $IFNAME

=head2 tincd/linux

TAP-device; already part of the kernel (2.2 only). See
C<native/linux> for more info.

C<ifname> should be set to the path of a tap device,
e.g. C</dev/tap0>. The interface will be named accordingly.

=head2 native/cygwin

TAP-device; The TAP device to be used must either be the CIPE driver
(C<http://cipe-win32.sourceforge.net/>), or (highly recommended) the newer
TAP-Win32 driver bundled with openvpn (http://openvpn.sf.net/). Just
download and run the openvpn installer. The only option you need to select
is the TAP driver.

C<ifname> should be set to the name of the device, found in the registry
at (no kidding :):

      HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Network\{4D36E972-E325-11CE-BFC1-08002BE10318}\<adapterid>\Connection\Name

The MAC address is dynamically being patched into packets and
ARP-requests, so only IPv4 works with ARP on this platform.

=head2 tincd/bsd

TAP-device, maybe; migth work for many bsd variants.

This driver is a newer version of the C<tincd/*bsd> drivers. It I<might>
provide a TAP device, or might not work at all. You might try this
interface type first, and, if it doesn't work, try one of the OS-specific
drivers.

=head2 tincd/freebsd

TAP-device; part of the kernel (since 4.x, maybe earlier).

C<ifname> should be set to the path of a tap device,
e.g. C</dev/tap0>. The interface will be named accordingly.

These commands might be helpful examples:

  ifconfig $IFNAME 10.0.0.$NODEID
  route add -net 10.0.0.0 -netmask 255.255.255.0 -interface $IFNAME 10.0.0.$NODEID

=head2 tincd/netbsd

TUN-device; The interface is a point-to-point device. To initialize it,
you currently need to configure it as a point-to-point device, giving it
an address on your vpn (the exact address doesn't matter), like this:

  ifconfig $IFNAME mtu $MTU up
  ifconfig $IFNAME 10.11.12.13 10.55.66.77
  route add -net 10.0.0.0 10.55.66.77 255.0.0.0
  ping -c1 10.55.66.77 # ping once to tell gvpe your gw ip

The ping is required to tell the ARP emulator inside GVPE the local IP
address.

C<ifname> should be set to the path of a tun device,
e.g. C</dev/tun0>. The interface will be named accordingly.

=head2 tincd/openbsd

TUN-device; already part of the kernel. See C<tincd/netbsd> for more information.

=head2 native/darwin

TAP-device;

The necessary kernel extension can be found here:

  http://www-user.rhrk.uni-kl.de/~nissler/tuntap/

There are two drivers, the one to use is the "tap" driver. It driver must
be loaded before use, read the docs on how to install it as a startup
item.

C<ifname> should be set to the path of a tap device,
e.g. C</dev/tap0>. The interface will be named accordingly.

These commands might be helpful examples:

  ifconfig $IFNAME 10.0.0.$NODEID
  route add -net 10.0.0.0 -interface $IFNAME 255.255.255.0

=head2 tincd/darwin

TUN-device; See C<tincd/netbsd> for more information. C<native/darwin> is
preferable.

The necessary kernel extension can be found here:

  http://chrisp.de/en/projects/tunnel.html

C<ifname> should be set to the path of a tun device,
e.g. C</dev/tun0>. The interface will be named accordingly.

The driver must be loaded before use:

  kmodload tunnel

=head2 tincd/solaris

TUN-device; already part of the kernel(?), or available here:

  http://vtun.sourceforge.net/tun/

Some precompiled tun drivers might be available here:

  http://www.monkey.org/~dugsong/fragroute/

The interface MAC and MTU are I<NOT> set up for you. Please try it out and
send me an C<ifconfig> command invocation that does that.

See C<tincd/netbsd> for more information.

Completely unstested so far.

=head2 tincd/mingw

TAP-device; see C<native/cygwin> for more information.

The setup is likely to be similar to C<native/cygwin>.

Completely untested so far.

=head2 tincd/raw_socket

TAP-device; purpose unknown and untested, probably binds itself on an
existing ethernet device (given by C<ifname>). It must be down prior to
running the command, and GVPE will try to set it's MAC address and MTU to
the "correct" values.

Completely untested so far.

=head2 tincd/uml_socket

TAP-device; purpose unknown and untested, probably creates a unix datagram
socket (path given by C<ifname>) and reads and writes raw packets, so
might be useful in other than UML contexts.

No network interface is created, and the MAC and MTU must be set as
approriate on the other side of the socket.  GVPE will exit if the MAC
address doesn't match what it expects.

Completely untested so far.

=head2 tincd/cygwin

Known to be broken, use C<native/cygwin> instead.

=head1 SEE ALSO

gvpe(5).

=head1 AUTHOR

Marc Lehmann <gvpe@schmorp.de>

