=begin texinfo header

\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c GENERATED FILE, gvpe.texi.pod is the source, not gvpe.texi!
@c GENERATED FILE, gvpe.texi.pod is the source, not gvpe.texi!
@c GENERATED FILE, gvpe.texi.pod is the source, not gvpe.texi!
@c GENERATED FILE, gvpe.texi.pod is the source, not gvpe.texi!
@c GENERATED FILE, gvpe.texi.pod is the source, not gvpe.texi!
@c GENERATED FILE, gvpe.texi.pod is the source, not gvpe.texi!
@c %**start of header
@finalout
@setfilename gvpe.info
@settitle GNU Virtual Private Ethernet Manual
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
@dircategory Networking tools
@direntry
* gvpe: (gvpe).              The GNU VPE Manual.
@end direntry

This is the info manual for vpe, the Virtual Private Ethernet daemon.

Copyright @copyright{} 2003-2005 Marc Lehmann <gvpe@@plan9.de>.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title gvpe Manual
@author Marc Lehmann (template by Ivo Timmermans and Guus Sliepen)

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@cindex copyright

Copyright @copyright{} 2003-2004 Marc Lehmann <gvpe@@plan9.de>.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

@end titlepage

@contents

=end texinfo

This is the documentation for the GNU Virtual Private Ethernet suite.

The GNU Virtual Private Ethernet suite implements a virtual (uses udp,
tcp, rawip and other protocols for tunneling), private (encrypted,
authenticated) ethernet (mac-based, broadcast-based network) that is
shared among multiple nodes, in effect implementing an ethernet bus over
public networks.

=for texinfo menu-begin


=for texinfo menu-item Overview:: Introduction to and Tutorial for GVPE (gvpe(5))

=for texinfo include pod gvpe.5.pod


=for texinfo menu-item OS Dependencies:: OS-Dependent Installation and Configuration Notes (gvpe.osdep(5))

=for texinfo include pod gvpe.osdep.5.pod


=for texinfo menu-item gvpe.conf:: The main configuration file (gvpe.conf(5))

=for texinfo include pod gvpe.conf.5.pod


=for texinfo menu-item gvpectrl:: Configuration/Control Program Reference (gvpectrl(8))

=for texinfo include pod gvpectrl.8.pod


=for texinfo menu-item gvpe:: The GVPE Daemon (gvpe(8))

=for texinfo include pod gvpe.8.pod


=for texinfo menu-item gvpe.protocol:: The GVPE Transport and VPN Protocols (gvpe.protocol(7))

=for texinfo include pod gvpe.protocol.7.pod


=for texinfo menu-item Simple Example:: A simple yet realistic Example

In this example, gvpe is used to implement a simple, UDP-based ethernet
on three hosts.

The config file (C<gvpe.conf>) is the same on all hosts:

   enable-udp = yes     # use UDP
   udp-port = 407       # use this UDP port
   mtu = 1492           # handy for TDSL
   ifname = vpn0        # I prefer vpn0 over e.g. tap0

   node = huffy         # arbitrary node name
   hostname = 1.2.3.4   # ip address if this host

   node = welshy
   hostname = www.example.net # resolve at connection time

   node = wheelery
   # no hostname, will be determinded dynamically using router1 or router2

C<gvpe> will execute the C<if-up> script on every hosts, which, for linux,
could look like this for all three hosts:

   ifconfig $IFNAME hw ether $MAC mtu $MTU
   ifconfig $IFNAME 10.0.0.$NODE
   route add -net 10.0.0.0 netmask 255.0.0.0 dev $IFNAME

The C<10.0.0.$NODE> resolves to C<10.0.0.1> on C<huffy>, C<10.0.0.2> on
C<welshy> and so on. Other schemes, such as C<10.$NODE.0.1> might be
useful, too.

After generating the keys (L<gvpectrl>) and starting the daemon (C<gvpe -D
-l info >I<NODENAME> for test purposes) the three hosts should be able to
ping each other.

If you have an internal C<10.x.x.x> network (with a tighter netmask then
C<255.0.0.0>, e.g. C<10.1.0.0> on C<huffy>, C<10.2.0.0> on C<welshy> and
so on), you can now enable ip-forwarding and proxy-arp (or set the hosts
as default gateway), and your three hosts should forward traffic from each
network to each other.


=for texinfo menu-item Complex Example:: A non-trivial Example

=for texinfo include text complex-example/README


=for texinfo menu-begin

=for texinfo menu-item complex/gvpe.conf:: An example gvpe configuration

=for texinfo include example complex-example/gvpe.conf

=for texinfo menu-item complex/if-up:: A fully-routing if-up config

=for texinfo include example complex-example/if-up

=for texinfo menu-item complex/node-up:: A node-up/node-down script utilizing dynds

=for texinfo include example complex-example/node-up

=for texinfo menu-end


=for texinfo menu-item Index:: Keyword and Concept index

=begin texinfo

@printindex cp

=end texinfo

=for texinfo menu-end

=begin texinfo footer

@bye

=end texinfo

