.Dd 2002-03-25
.Dt VPECTRL 8
.\" Manual page created by:
.\" Ivo Timmermans <ivo@o2w.nl>
.\" Guus Sliepen <guus@sliepen.eu.org>
.\" Modified extensively by Marc Lehmann <pcg@goof.com>
.Sh NAME
.Nm vpectrl
.Nd Virtual Private Ethernet Control Program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl cgks
.Op Fl -config Ns = Ns Ar DIR
.Op Fl -generate-keys
.Op Fl -help
.Op Fl -kill Ns = Ns Ar SIGNAL
.Op Fl -show-config
.Op Fl -version
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This is the control program for the vped, the virtual private ethernet daemon.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl c, -config Ns = Ns Ar DIR
Read configuration options from
.Ar DIR .
.It Fl g, -generate-keys
Generate public/private RSA keypair and exit.
.It Fl -help
Display short list of options.
.It Fl k, -kill Ns Op = Ns Ar SIGNAL
Attempt to kill a running
.Nm
(optionally with the specified
.Ar SIGNAL
instead of SIGTERM) and exit.
.It Fl s, --show-config
Show a summary of the configuration, and how vped interprets it. Can also be very useful
when designing firewall scripts.
.It Fl -version
Output version information and exit.
.El
.Sh BUGS
.Pp
If you find any bugs, report them to vpe@plan9.de.
.Sh TODO
A lot.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vpe.conf 5 ,
.Xr vped 8 ,
.Pp
The full documentation for vpe is maintained as a Texinfo manual.
If the info and tinc programs are properly installed at your site,
the command
.Ic info vpe
should give you access to the complete manual.
.Pp
vpe comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.
This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it under certain conditions;
see the file COPYING for details.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "Marc Lehmann" Aq vpe@plan9.de
.Pp
And thanks to many others for their contributions to vpe, especially the tincd authors
who inspired this program and whose sourcecode I scavanged!
